---
layout: post
title: Vim 101
description: A gentle introduction to Vim
tags: [text-editor, vim]
---

Text editor is one of the main tools we use everyday to write code. In order to
become a productive developer, mastering how to use text editor effectively is a
must.

After a year learning web development, I have tried Sublime Text, Atom, and
Visual Studio Code. My workflow has changed significantly since I discovered Vim. I
have used Vim for couple months and I don't want to go back using any other text
editor.

Unlike many modern text editors, Vim editing mechanism is quite different. It
takes some time for beginners to get familiar with. The learning curve is a bit
steep, but it pays off. Once you are used to it, you realize you write code
faster, become more productive and your workflow increases noticeably.

## Installation

Mac OSX comes with Vim pre-installed. You can start Vim in terminal by typing
`vim`. But if you want modern and slick look, I recommend MacVim. You can
download the binary [here](http://macvim-dev.github.io/macvim/). I prefer
install it by [homebrew](http://brew.sh/index.html).

{% highlight bash %}
brew update && brew install macvim
{% endhighlight %}


## Basic Vim Configuration

You can configure almost every detail of Vim. Vim out of the box is pretty plain. That is a good thing because you can
configure it however you like from ground up. You personally configure Vim thought
`$HOME/.vimrc`.

{% highlight bash %}
cd ~
touch .vimrc
mvim .vimrc
{% endhighlight %}

Here is some basic configurations that got me started. Overtime, when you get
familiar with it, you could do some research to configure further to suit your
needs. One of the best way to learn Vim configuration is to refer to others'
`.vimrc` file. This is my `.vimrc`
[file](https://github.com/squoc/mydotfiles/blob/master/vimrc) if you need some
ideas.

{% highlight bash %}
" set Vim incompatible with Vi to enable some vim-only features
set nocompatible

"set syntax highlight and color scheme
syntax enable
set background=dark
colorscheme desert

"set font and font size of 14
set guifont=Source\ Code\ Pro:h14

" make backspace behave like every other editor.
set backspace=indent,eol,start

" set line number display
set number

" detect file change outside Vim
set autoread

" search settings
set incsearch         " find the next match while typing
set hlsearch          " highlight searches by default
set ignorecase
set smartcase         " override ic with search pattern

" indentation settings
set autoindent        " auto indent based on line above
set smartindent       " smarter indent for C-like languages

" tabs settings
set expandtab         " use spaces instead of tabs
set tabstop=2         " tab is 2 spaces, for ruby programming
set softtabstop=2
set shiftwidth=2
set smarttab

{% endhighlight %}

## Vim Fundamentals

### Opening and closing files

Some people joke that the most important Vim command you learn would be `:q!`. I
still remember the first time I accidentally opened Vim. I spent next 5 minutes
trying to figure how to get out. I ended up googling the answer.

First, return to `NORMAL` mode by hitting `ESC`, then type `:q!`.

You can open or create new file in MacVim by command:

{% highlight bash %}
mvim [filename]
{% endhighlight %}

When you open/create a file, Vim allocates a chunk of memory for your file
called buffer. What you are editing is a *copy* of your file, it has no effect
on your file until you save it.

You save a file by typing the ex command `:w`. The command `:e!` allows you to
delete all the changes and go back to last save. You quit files by `:q`,
sometimes you want to quit without saving, you can use force quit `:q!`. If you
want to save and quit at the same time, you use `:x` or `:wq`.

### Vim modes

One of the most important concepts in Vim is modes. There are 6 modes in Vim.
This sounds overwhelming but it does really not. Once you understand the
concept, you could be able to trigger and switch among modes naturally and easily. Notice that Vim is case sensitive, which mean `i` and `I` are different keys and have different functionalities. These Vim modes are:

* NORMAL
* INSERT
* VISUAL
* REPLACE
* COMMAND-LINE
* VISUAL-BLOCK

| Trigger | Mode |
|:--------|:--------|
| \<ESC\> | NORMAL  |
|   i     | INSERT |
|   v     | VISUAL |
|   :     | COMMAND-LINE |
| \<C-v\>(read CTRL-v) | VISUAL-BLOCK |
|   R     | REPLACE |

#### NORMAL mode

This is Vim default mode. This is where you move around or run a command. You
can't edit content in this mode. Beginners usually mistake this mode for INSERT
mode.

#### INSERT mode

This mode is where you actually edit content.

#### VISUAL mode

This mode allows you to highlight parts of your content and decide what to do
with it. You could delete, yank (copy) or trigger COMMAND mode on currently
selected portion of text.

#### REPLACE mode

This mode lets you type over the content under cursor. I don't use this mode
much.

#### COMMAND-LINE mode

This mode could be triggered within any mode except INSERT mode. Simply type `:<some
command>`. For example, in NORMAL mode, you want to delete from line 10 to line
100, you could type `:10,100d`(d for delete).

#### VISUAL-BLOCK mode

This mode lets you make the same change vertically to multiple rows. Quite
useful if you edit multiple similar rows.

### Move around

When you write code, not 100% of time you spend writing. You move cursor
around, make change or delete the old chunk of code. With other text editors,
you normally use arrow keys. The thing is this slows you down significantly
because you have to lift your fingers to reach the arrow keys. Vim has an unique
mechanism to move cursor without using arrow keys. This is one of many features
that made me fall in love with Vim. When you want to move around, you simply
switch back from INSERT to NORMAL mode and use `h`, `j`, `k`, `l` for left,
  down, up, right, respectively.

#### Counts

Certain Vim commands allow you to precede with numbers. The general format is:
`[counts]command`. For instance, you want to move down 2 lines from current
position, you run `2j`.

Table of some simple moving commands:

| Command | Functionality |
|:---------|:--------------|
| [counts]w | move right [counts] words |
| [counts]b | move left [counts] words |
| [counts]e | move right [counts] words, cursor at the end of word |
| [counts]ge| move left [counts] words, cursor at the end of word |
| 0(zero)   | move to beginning of the line |
|    ^      | move to first character of the line |
|    $      | move to end of the line |
|    g_     | move to last character of the line |
|    gg     | move to the top of file |
|    G      | move to the end of file |

### Simple editing

#### Text objects

`:h text-objects` for more help.

To get a good grasp on editing, you need to learn the concept of text object.
When you are writing code, you are interacting with text objects.  Your file
content consists of multiple text objects. These are words, sentences,
paragraphs, text block between (), [], {}, '', "", \<\>, ``. Each text object
precedes with `i` (inner) or `a` (a). For instance, `aw` is a word, `i[` is
inner of square bracket. The general format of commands used on text
objects is: `[operator][ia]{text-object}`

#### Operations on text objects

`:h operator` for more help.

| Operator | What it does | Example | Explanation |
|:---------|:-------------|:--------|:------------|
|   d      |   delete     | da{     | delete a {} block|
|   y      |   yank(copy) | yi"     | copy string inside double quote |
|   c      |   change(delete and insert)     | c$     | change to the end of line |
|   g~      |  switch case | g~a'   | 'Hello' -> 'hELLO' |
|   gU     |  uppercase   |  gUi"   | "pi" -> "PI" |
|   gu     | lowercase    |  gua[   |  [HELLO] -> [hello] |
|   =      | auto indent block of code | =a{ | reindent a {} block |
|   \<      | shift left block of code  | \<a( | shift left 1 tab a () block |
|   \>      | shift right block of code | \>a< | shift right 1 tab a <> block |

#### Everyday text manipulation commands

| Command | What it does |
|:--------|:-------------|
|   a     | append after cursor |
|   i     | insert before cursor |
|   o     | insert line after |
|   x     | delete one char at a time |
|   r{new_char} | replace at cursor(in NORMAL mode) |
|   s     | substitute char at cursor(trigger INSERT mode) |
|   u     | undo last change |
| \<C-r\> | redo last change |
|   j     | join two lines |
|   dd    | delete a line |
|   cc    | change a line |
|   C     | change text from cursor to the end |
|   D     | delete text from cursor to then end |
|   O     | insert line before |
|   A     | append at the end of line |
|   I     | insert at beginning of line |

#### DRY command

Don't repeat yourself. Vim stores each edit command in temporary buffer. You
could run the last edit command by hitting . (dot).

## Where to get help

Surprisingly, the most useful resource is not Google, but the manual right in your Vim editor. I find Vim manual
the most detailed and concise resource. You can open the manual by using command
`:h <thing confuses you>`. For instance, you hear people talk about black
hole register, and you want to find out what on earth it has anything to do with
text editing, you could run `:h registers` and trigger search command
`/black hole`.

Vim subreddit is one good resource for tips, tricks. I am a camper there.

## Conclusion

I hope my post is adequate for beginners to get started with Vim. Mastering
Vim is a huge topic. Some people might use it for couple years. Chances are they
still aren't aware of all the features. If you want to become a Vim pro, you
have to keep digging into the tool. However, like Bram Moolenaar, the Vim's author
said trying to remember every Vim functionality is a waste of time.
Instead, you should focus on your workflow, try to improve and find shortcuts
for your repeated tasks. He writes a very interesting article on his website:
  [Seven habits of effective text
  editing](http://www.moolenaar.net/habits.html). I recommend you read it to
  learn the tool properly.
